docs: Managing microservices dependencies first draft (#25)
openfoodfacts/.github: docs/decisions/managing-service-dependencies.md

Custom tooling will be used so that we can cope with circular dependencies and to allow loading of dependencies to be performed using a single command.

This will be achieved as follows:

Each project will have a makefile in its root folder with a target named "run". This target will fetch any missing dependencies from GitHub into peer directories, change into each of the directories and execute `make -e run`. Note it is important to make each directory the working directory when running to ensure that local `.env` files are imported.

The `make run` target must function when only the root folder of the project is cloned, e.g. when using `git clone --filter=blob:none --sparse ...` and should use the latest images from GitHub (i.e. not require a local build) by default. Note that the initiating project could override the image tag used from "latest" to "dev" to use a local container.

If a project anticipates that it could be part of a circular reference then it should defend for this by setting a temporary environment variable, e.g.

```make
run:
ifndef PROJECT1_RUNNING
# Fetch and start dependencies
	@export PROJECT1_RUNNING=true; \
	for dep in "project2" "project3" ; do \

> 		if [ ! -d ../$$dep ]; then \

Author: Hi @hangy . I appreciate what you are saying about going back up a folder but I couldn't think of another way that didn't get too complicated especially if there are circular dependencies. It looks like the PO GitHub actions are allowing it though...

If a developer also wants to work on a referenced service they can easily convert it into a full clone using `git sparse-checkout disable`. Note that the `blob:none` filter is still applied but this should not present too many complications.

#### Testing

In most cases tests should not rely on external dependencies and these should be mocked where appropriate. However, if an external dependency is essential for specific integration or end-to-end tests then the above described mechanism should _not_ be used and it is the originating project's responsibility to pull in the required dependencies and also take care of any further chained dependencies.

This could be achieved by adding a specific docker compose configuration invoked during tests to pull in additional dependencies, or by using a suitable [testcontainers](https://testcontainers.com/) implementation.

### Confirmation

Compliance with this approach should become self-evident as project start to include dependencies from other projects.

If a dependency is found which requires more than just docker compose and a bash shell to run, then a bug should be logged in that repo.

> Tools like GitPod [multi-repository working](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/multi-repo) support this approach.

Author: We may also want to review for other novel development environments, like GitHub codespaces

# Managing Service Dependencies

## Context and Problem Statement

> As we split OpenFoodFacts up into smaller, more manageable, services, it becomes increasingly difficult for developers to know what additional services need to be deployed in order for the service they are working on to function correctly. This becomes increasingly difficult if the referenced service itself has other dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we split Open Food Facts up into smaller, more manageable, services, it becomes increasingly difficult for developers to know what additional services need to be deployed in order for the service they are working on to function correctly. This becomes increasingly difficult if the referenced service itself has other dependencies.
```

Note that for development and testing purposes it is recommended that any dependencies are mocked or managed using tools like testcontainers, rather than relying on a separate service being up. This document concerns itself more with creating a workable end-to-end deployment that can be used for ad-hoc, interactive testing and discovery.

> This document is specifically concerned with "internal" dependencies where shared state is needed, e.g. each service can have its own independent database rather than relying on a shared database service, but the messaging system (Redis) needs to be shared in order for messages to pass between services. Dependencies on services outside the scope of OpenFoodFacts are referred to as "external" dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is specifically concerned with "internal" dependencies where shared state is needed, e.g. each service can have its own independent database rather than relying on a shared database service, but the messaging system (Redis) needs to be shared in order for messages to pass between services. Dependencies on services outside the scope of Open Food Facts are referred to as "external" dependencies.
```

## Decision Drivers

* the definition of dependencies should be as close as possible to the particular service's source code
* existing tooling should be used wherever possible
* the mechanism to pull in any dependencies should be as simple and as fast as possible
* any mechanism needs to be compatible with all supported development environments, e.g. local code, dev containers, GitPod
* it should be relatively straightforward for a developer to switch from a simple "latest" deployment of a referenced service to a version that is also undergoing local development

## Considered Options

* Use the docker compose include command to reference dependencies in sibling folders
* Develop a custom tool that works from a list of dependencies defined in a file

## Decision Outcome

Custom tooling will be used so that we can cope with circular dependencies and to allow loading of dependencies to be performed using a single command.

Each project must provide the following:

* A file with the list of other services it depends on

> * a docker compose file which loads the service and any of its external dependencies from the latest available images

Reviewer 2: I think this image version should be configurable (in case your devs impact two repositories) but should defaults to latest stable version. 

It can be done through environment, of course.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a docker compose file which loads the service and any of its external dependencies (from the latest stable images by default, but configurable through environment)
```

```make
include .env

export

# Set the DEPS_DIR if it hasn't been set already
ifndef DEPS_DIR
	export DEPS_DIR=${PWD}/deps
endif

# Space delimited list of dependant projects
DEPS=project2 project3

# Use override here to ensure this is not inherited from the environment

> override DOCKER_COMPOSE=COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=${PROJECT1_PROJECT_NAME} COMPOSE_FILE="${PROJECT1_COMPOSE_FILE}" docker compose

Reviewer 2: This will also affect ordinary commands, won't it ?

Reviewer 2: If I understand it well, in off-server we have to define a OFF_SERVER_PROJECT_NAME ?

Author: Not yet. It is only a problem when you are working on a project that needs to be pulled in as a dependency as you don't want any environment variables from the depending (parent) project to overwrite your own.
